Replace regex with `winnow` based parser (#255)
heroku/buildpacks-procfile: SPEC.md

The classic `Procfile` has no formal specification. It is loosely defined based on a regex `"^[[:space:]]*([a-zA-Z0-9_-]+):?\\s+(.*)[[:space:]]*`. This specification is informed by the CNB specification for process names and [kubernetes](https://github.com/heroku/buildpacks-procfile/issues/251).

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

- Spaces
  - The term spaces refers to non-newline whitespace characters such as tab `'\t'` or space `'\s'` characters.
- Each line MUST contain a comment, empty line, or key/value pair.
- Comments
  - A line MAY contain a comment
  - Comments MUST contain a `#` as the first visible character on each line.
  - A comment MAY be proceeded by one or more spaces.
- Empty line
  - A Procfile MAY contain empty lines
  - An empty line MUST be zero or more spaces followed by a line ending or end of file (EOF).
- Key/Value pairs
  - A line MAY contain a key/value pair where the key represents the name of a process and the value represents a command

>   - A key MUST be separated from its value by a colon (`:`) followed by zero or more spaces.

Reviewer: I don't think this spec covers a space before the `:`? Like `my-process : bin/blah`. I think that should be legal, but I could be wrong.

Author: > I think that should be legal, but I could be wrong.

Looking at the prior regex

```
^[[:space:]]*([a-zA-Z0-9_-]+):?\\s+(.*)[[:space:]]*
```

- starts with one or more whitespace characters
- alphanumeric or `_` or `-`
- funny enough the `:` is optional, but it doesn't support spaces before `:`
- A space after the (optional) `:` is enforced (which is a requirement we've loosened up). It cannot be a tab, it must be a space (which we've loosened up).
- Then it grabs the value
- Then the regex makes it look like it strips off any trailing spaces but it doesn't. Rust won't strip it out:

<img width="1115" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/86274ce9-37db-41b8-8282-3cedbf7fac1b" />

Nor will ruby:

```
irb(main):005:0> match = "web: rails s         ".match(/^[[:space:]]*([a-zA-Z0-9_-]+):?\s+(.*)[[:space:]]*/);
=> #<MatchData "web: rails s         " 1:"web" 2:"rails s         ">
irb(main):006:0> match[2]
=> "rails s         "
```

So a space before the `:` wouldn't work today, but instead of an error or warning you'll quietly get an ignored line. I don't think we want to support optional `:`.

Reviewer 2: I'm also in favour of making the spec (and the Procfile CNB implementation) more strict than the current implementation in cases where we think it makes sense. So long as the Procfile CNB error message is clear, users can tweak their Procfile if needed as part of migrating to CNB.

Reviewer 3: +1 on @edmorley's comment. I imagine most of the allowed weird `Procfile`s on cedar are accidentally valid.

> # CNB Procfile format specification

Reviewer: I like that this exists, but I wonder if this spec should be shared/enforced more widely?

Author: > shared

You mean you're wanting more feedback from a diverse group of people (such as other Heroku teams) or you're wanting to promote the format to a larger group outside of Heroku such as language communities (or both)?

I'm open to both. I'm also open to suggestions. Perhaps we link to the SPEC from the readme and make it more prominent.

> enforced

We could share the logic by providing a stand-alone parser utility that converts it to some other format like json or toml. We could start by calling both parsers in cedar and instrumenting failures. While people are using `#` like comments in today's procfile, technically any leading character would work `//`.

I also had the idea that I could expose the parser or ship it via crates.io so that other buildpacks could use it. Some buildpacks have logic like "If app has a Procfile..." but it would be more robust to share the same parsing logic.

Getting a little ahead of myself. We could also consider upstreaming RFC 1123 to the CNB spec to make it more clear so then it's not "the procfile buildpack supports the intersection of kubernetes and CNB" and then becomes simply "the procfile buildpack supports the CNB spec".

Reviewer: Oh, I was just thinking share/enforce this across Heroku more broadly. This will be the third Procfile parser at Heroku, and I doubt they are consistent. This isn't a blocker for this PR though.

I'd support adjusting the CNB spec to have process names that match RFC 1123 if you wanted to do that. I expect many / most CNB users expect to use apps built with CNBs in kubernetes in some way.

- Comments
  - A line MAY contain a comment
  - Comments MUST contain a `#` as the first visible character on each line.
  - A comment MAY be proceeded by one or more spaces.
- Empty line
  - A Procfile MAY contain empty lines
  - An empty line MUST be zero or more spaces followed by a line ending or end of file (EOF).
- Key/Value pairs
  - A line MAY contain a key/value pair where the key represents the name of a process and the value represents a command
- Key
  - A key's first and last character MUST be a lowercase alphanumeric (a-z0-9) character (but not `-`).
  - All other key (middle) characters MUST be lowercase alphanumeric (a-z0-9) characters or hyphen `-`.
  - Key length MUST be within the range `1..=63`
  - An implementation MAY accept `_` as a middle character provided it converts it to `-` and issues a warning.
  - An implementation MAY accept an uppercase character provided it is converted to lowercase characters and issues a warning.
  - A key MAY begin with zero or more spaces provided they are not included in the return key.
  - A colon MUST terminate a key `:` (the colon is not included in the key return value).

> - Value

Reviewer: I'd suggest a `Separator` entry. Separator would include `:` and any whitespace around it? That would prevent `:` from being part of the key and ` ` from being part of the value.

Author: Here's a stacked PR with that alternative https://github.com/heroku/buildpacks-procfile/pull/256. I like your suggestion.

  - A value MUST be proceeded by a key.

>   - A value MAY begin with 0 or more spaces.

Author: Starting spaces are trimmed, we could memorialize that in the spec with:

```suggestion
  - A value MAY be preceded with 0 or more spaces. These spaces are not part of the value.
```

Trailing spaces are not trimmed, they're considered to be part of the value. I don't have a good use case for that behavior, but it's what we're currently doing and IDK if there's a world where whitespace might somehow be significant.

>   - A value MAY begin with 0 or more spaces.

Author: I'm playing with using "separated" wording as well based on your other suggestion. Working up a stacked PR.

>   - A value MAY begin with 0 or more spaces.

Author: Alternative wording in a stacked PR https://github.com/heroku/buildpacks-procfile/pull/256
